Even your hash browns need hashtags to sell…

Social media is the vast mega-phone that you have access to. Once you’re using it the right way, the entire world will be able to hear you. It’s all about how you use it.

Let alone Gen Z, did you know that 30% of millennial eaters avoid a restaurant with a weaker Instagram profile?

Again, forget the stats, data, and what the people are saying. How often do you share food and food place reviews with your best friends and consider going there for your next outing?

Now, that is how much social media influences your eating choices.

While most people would say Instagram, I’d strongly suggest this 5–5–5 strategy that I’ve been reading about on LinkedIn lately. I’ve slightly modified it for an Indian food business.

It’s about focusing on,

5 different platforms while performing,

5 forms of engagement and monitoring the

5 important metrics.

Okay, now let’s dive deep into this.

Instagram tops the list as most people live on their Instagram page more than their own houses (now, let’s not forget about people posting GRWM’s). As a food business owner, if you can get your customers and influencers to create user-generated content (UGC) for you, there’s nothing more you can ask for regarding marketing.

Instagram’s engagement has a “RULE,” Literally. It might all sound familiar, but the magic lies in what we do not do, right?

Now, don’t ask me if it still exists. If you run a family restaurant, go on, buddy. Your target customers are all in here. Facebook has a massive number of users in India. Start by promoting your business on Facebook groups and starting a Facebook page to post offers, giveaways, and family-friendly content.

This is the easiest platform for building an audience base if you can create fantastic content. Come on, I must not have been the only one who followed Anacrylics and random cake-baking pages to listen to their stories. (Pro-tip: people love stories; if you can master the art of storytelling, you can sell almost anything with ease.) Of course, this needs more effort than an Instagram page, but you can always utilize the shorts section to get into people’s feeds.

Trust me, people are so into posting Pinterest-coded photos on every platform. Pinterest is not just any other social media platform; it is slowly becoming the new standard of living. So promoting the amazing photo spots at your place and super aesthetic food alone is enough to have people flooding in.

This might sound very new to all of you, as Zomato isn’t exactly a social media platform. However, it has a strong social media element and a huge influence on people’s decisions because of its dining section on the app. Of course, we want to know what places other people are recommending to be on the safe side.

Are you ready to take your food business to the next level? Start using these tips, and do comment if you have anything else up your sleeve.