A few weeks ago, on a cold, rainy day in London, my wife and I found ourselves at Westminster Abbey. Unlike the usual experience of being run over by marauding, selfie-stick-brandishing loud tourists in famous locations, we were instead immediately engulfed in a sagely serenity, often interspersed with whispers and soft voices echoing through the walls of this immense Gothic church.

Ah, the joys of being nouveau empty-nesters who can finally dodge the tourist seasons.

In the quiet, somewhat dark, and cold interior of a structure built several centuries ago, what stood out to me was the sheer intricacy of the architecture. The pointed arches, ribbed vaults, and elaborate tracery were stark reminders of an era when craftsmanship was not just a practice but a philosophy. Then my eyes settled on the fractal designs on the walls, the woodwork, and the crystal glass windows casting magical colored light.

What stood out to me most was the meticulous attention to detail in every design. Every stained-glass window, every piece of woodwork on the furniture, and every arch seemed to have a unified purpose and a story.

To me, it screamed the story of deep attention, taste, and craftsmanship. Things that we seem to be moving away from in today’s fast changing world.

As I tried to vividly imagine what it must have felt like to create something like this over years and years of disciplined, attention-laden work, something else struck me — there were no errors in the design or colors anywhere.

This, despite the immense scale of the work in this massive church. Not to mention that the level of detail wasn’t just impressive; at some level, it felt instructive. It tells us something about the people who built it — their patience, their skill, and their unwillingness to settle for anything less than what their original vision may have been. That kind of disciplined attention has become rare, especially when we look at the modern world of branding and design. A world where the brand now caters to 1 second of attention from furiously-scrolling audiences.

But first, let’s dwell a little on the evolution of brands from detailed to … bland.

Over the years and especially during the industrial revolution, Europe arguably led the world when it came to fashion and brand.

Take Hermès, for example. Founded in 1837 by Thierry Hermès, the brand originally specialized in high-quality harnesses and bridles for horses. Over time, it expanded into other areas of luxury, including its iconic bags and then scarves, first introduced in 1937.

If you happen to have one of these in your hand, pay close attention and you can trace the early European gothic architecture with attention to detail and an extreme display of craftsmanship in these scarves which still goes for thousands of dollars.

Each Hermès scarf is a masterpiece in itself, created through a phenomenally meticulous process that begins with hand-drawn designs by skilled artists. These designs are then screen-printed onto the finest silk using multiple layers of vibrant dyes — sometimes up to 45 colors for a single scarf. The result is a timeless piece of wearable art that remains in demand for its elegance, craftsmanship, and exclusivity.

And get this — once a design has been created and used in a scarf, it is never again reused.

Here’s something to think about — a scarf with even a minor mistake is thrown away. But what did the craftsmen do if there was an error while creating a permanent design in a church?

My marketing brain kicked in as I started to notice how the details in the brands, in fashion, in automobiles that emerged during the industrial revolution era have now moved towards the modern day obsessions with minimalism and efficiency.

Why is it so? Why do most modern brands look similar?

Why do they look all bland?

Is detail and craftsmanship no longer appreciated or is it due to infinitely smaller attention spans?

For sure, we no longer live in the industrial revolution.

We are now in the cognitive revolution — an era where intelligence, not mechanics, defines progress. And just as the industrial revolution shaped the aesthetics of its time, this new revolution is reshaping brands in ways that are not always for the better, at least in my opinion.

Few will disagree that branding today has shifted from ornate, detailed work to a hyper-sanitized version of simplicity.

Don’t believe me? Take a look at some evolution of brand logos.

There are a few key reasons for this:

As a result, we’ve seen the rise of “blands” — brands that strip away personality in favor of an ultra-minimal, ultra-safe aesthetic. Look at modern branding (I can speak of tech since that is where I live in), and you’ll see a pattern:

Minimalism was once a design philosophy with meaning. Now, it seems to be the default. But when everyone follows the same principles, nothing stands out.

This is the reason why when I see someone rebel, I feel a surge of optimism.

Enter anti-design — a movement that deliberately defies modern branding conventions. A great example? Charli XCX, whose album covers and promotional materials use clashing colors, generic fonts, and chaotic layouts. It’s an intentional rejection of the sterile sameness that has come to dominate branding. It is a deliberate opinion boldly spoken through its design.

But, here is the thing — even anti-design is just an aesthetic. And aesthetics, while important, only go so far. Looking innovative means nothing if the experience of discovery, using the product and dealing with the brand’s employees fall flat.

Brands that truly stand out aren’t just well-designed; they deliver an end-to-end human-centered experience.

Despite multiple views and definitions about what brand is, here is what I think — A brand is a promise. It’s an expectation of quality, experience, and personality which shows through in every step of the customer journey and often paid off by the product experience. If your design suggests innovation but your product is generic, you’ve lost trust.

In addition, true differentiation comes not from visual identity alone but from consistency in execution. A brand cannot just have a beautiful website but when it comes to support, the customers get “deflected” by an army of bots aimed at lowering the company’s cost instead of the customer’s experience.

In addition to the overall experience, brand is also about an authentic identity which comes from an opinionated personality, a voice, a point of view. And the easiest way to see this in action is to pose a simple question:If Nike or Apple opened a hotel, what would it look like?

You can probably imagine it in vivid detail.

Now ask yourself: If say, Hyatt made shoes, what would they look like?

Harder to picture, right? That’s because the majority of modern companies, despite being respected “brands,” lack the distinct identities that make a brand instantly recognizable.

A strong brand isn’t just known — it’s unmistakable in its opinion and has a screaming story about its authentic identity.

Then there is one thing that differentiates memorable brands- Taste.

What is taste, you ask?

An opinion, sometimes risky, of what audiences may like even before they know it themselves.

Great designers don’t design by committee or try to appease everyone. They make bold choices and stand by them. That’s why they are risky.

In the end, branding isn’t just about looking good. It’s about:

And the thing that ties it all?

Focus and attention.

The world doesn’t need more safe, forgettable brands. It needs brands that stand for something.

In my opinion, minimalism isn’t the problem; lack of personality is.

Whether through intricate design, bold anti-design, or simply an unwavering commitment to quality, brands need to own their identity.

Memorable brands have opinions, taste and focus built for people with opinions, taste and focus.

Blands do not.

✌️