As always, the Lab team kicked off the new year with a trip to Las Vegas last week to attend the annual Consumer Technology Show (CES), the biggest consumer tech and innovation exhibition on earth. This year’s CES was estimated to attract around 3,500 exhibitors and over 130,000 attendees worldwide, with over 40% of them from outside of the U.S. Judging by the crowded convention centers and wide breadth of innovations we encountered, those estimates seemed entirely on target.

To make sense of an event as all-encompassing as CES, it is important to place it within the contexts of the innovations that came before and those hovering over the horizon, as well as the broader socio-political circumstances, so as to parse through the trends and patterns that emerged from the show.

This CES, in particular, took place two weeks ahead of President-elect Trump officially taking office. Considering the trade tariffs that Trump has threatened to impose, which the CTA (the organization behind CES) estimated could reduce American consumers’ spending power by $90 billion on electronic products including TVs, headphones, laptops and tablets, and game consoles, it is no surprise that non-U.S. manufacturers and gadget-makers had a strong showing, perhaps out of a heightened sense of urgency to grab some headlines and raise brand profile to hedge against incoming tariffs on their products.

This trend is particularly evident in the auto section of the show — most of the prominent U.S. carmakers, including GM, Ford, and Tesla, were absent from the show floor, and that void was filled by international auto brands that not only includes household brands like Toyota, Honda, and Hyundai, but also startup EV brands from China and Vietnam, such as Zeekr and BYD.

Elsewhere on the CES show floor, the absence of spa-grade bathroom tech (past CES staples Kohler and Moen are both no-show this year), is replaced by an expanded presence of home security gadgets and senior care tech. The AgeTech Collaborative from AARP notably took up significant real estate in the Venetian Sands Expo, bringing forth a variety of digital solutions aimed at a growing demographic that has been long underserved by Silicon Valley.

Despite these year-to-year changes in presence, or perhaps because of them, CES remains a reliable reflection of the consumer tech industry, as well as a harbinger of emerging trends. After spending several days walking all over the show floor to scout new and noteworthy gadgets and innovations, we here at the Lab have identified the following four cross-category trends that we believe will shape the future of consumer tech in 2025 and beyond.

CES started off as a grand showcase for cutting-edge TV sets and personal computers, and over the years, the biggest and brightest screens have tended to dominate the show floor and commend the visitors’ attention. In 2025, interactive screens are further expanding their presence at home and beyond, delivering new touchpoints, literally, for brands to engage with consumers.

From the weather-proof outdoor TV made by Sylvox to LG’s StanbyME portable TV that features a carrying strap, TVs have become less confined to the living room. In addition, they are also experimenting with new use cases, as evidenced by the battery-powered e-ink InkPoster connected displays created by PocketBook and Sharp.

Beyond TVs, screens are also showing up in a growing amount of smart home gadgets from connected fridges to wall-mounted smart home hubs. LG responded to Samsung in the race to add screens on just about every home appliance by unveiling a new microwave with a 27-inch touchscreen and speakers.

The screens are getting bigger and wider in cars too, as evidenced by BMW’s demo of its panoramic iDrive infotainment system, with a head-up display that spans the entire width of the windshield. Even something as mundane as the car roofs and backseat windows can be transformed into interactive touchscreens, thanks to the micro-LED displays by AUO, which unlock a fully immersive in-vehicle experience for consumers on-the-go.

The continued proliferation of touchscreens beyond the living rooms also means expanding the context in which consumers encounter brand messages and content. The interactive screens in kitchens, for instance, enable food and CPG brands to provide dynamic recipe suggestions, interactive cooking tutorials, or even real-time shopping list integrations. Therefore, marketers need to consider how to optimize their content for these environments, be it in the kitchen or on the road, and strive to add value to everyday consumer routines in those spaces.

CES is, at its core, an event dedicated to gadgets and hardware, so it’s not surprising that there were no major AI companies (such as OpenAI or Anthropic) in attendance this year. Still, the impact of the advancing AI capabilities was deeply felt across categories as more device makers race to integrate AI-enabled solutions into their products.

As screens continue to proliferate across new products and contexts, the latest wave of multimodal AI models is also expanding their capabilities. For example, AI-enabled chatbots capable of voice interactions, are being integrated into new TVs made by Samsung, LG, and TCL to allow consumers to simply chat with their TVs rather than clicking through remotes. Samsung also went one step further by incorporating computer vision into its new TVs, enabling a new “Click to Search” feature that can identify people, places or products on the screen and provide information tailored to viewers.

Multimodal AI is also quickly infiltrating wearables, in particular the growing number of mixed-reality (XR) glasses, one of the hottest emerging gadget categories on the show floor this year. Thanks to the high standards set by the arrival of the Apple Vision Pro in early 2024, as well as the growing popularity of the Meta Ray-Ban smart glasses (which recently added a few AI-enabled features like live translation), there were at least half a dozen XR companies — including Mojie, LAWK, XReal, and Rokid — all showcasing their latest XR glasses with varying degree of AI integrations.

Among them, the Halliday smart glasses stood out with an “invisible display” integrated into the frame, capable of showing real-time AI translation in text. Ray-Ban’s parent company EssilorLuxottica also showcased a new pair of Nuance Audio smart glasses that discreetly leveraged AI to serve as over-the-counter hearing aids. Look ahead, the upcoming Samsung smart glasses, set to debut later this month, will reportedly run on Android XR, presumably with built-in Google Gemini AI integrations.

The wide spread of AI integrations is also evident in smart home appliances. From smart door locks that integrate AI for facial recognition and presence detection, to the smart fridges by Hisense that can monitor the freshness of your groceries, or the one made by Samsung that uses AI to suggest groceries to buy on Instacart, home appliance brands were all demonstrably eager to integrate AI as a new selling point.

For brands, this trend points to an increased urgency in adapting existing strategies to leverage the expanding AI capabilities embedded in consumer devices. AI integration offers brands new avenues to create personalized, context-aware, and interactive experiences for their audiences. For example, AI-enabled smart home gadgets offer touchpoints for hyper-targeted messaging, as evidenced by the aforementioned Samsung smart fridge that can suggest grocery items to buy on Instacart based on what’s running low or the ingredients needed for a particular recipe. In addition, the integration of AI in these devices will unlock deeper insights into consumer preferences and patterns, enabling brands to fine-tune their messaging as needed.

The homebody economy continues to thrive even in the post-pandemic era, and the array of home-focused tech solutions showcased at this CES highlights the rising demand for creating homes that serve as ideal personal sanctuaries — offering comfort, functionality, and a sense of refuge from an increasingly unpredictable world.

Home robotics was an undeniable highlight of this CES, as new products showcased advancements in household automation and companionship. From the Roborock vacuum with a robotic arm for picking up socks and sandals while it cleans, to the one quipped with tiny wheeled legs for climbing over thresholds, robot vacuums attracted a lot of attention on the show floor with innovative form factors. Moreover, laundry-folding robots from the likes of Samsung and Seven Dreamers also wowed attendees with their ambidexter skills and promises of a “zero-labor-home” future.

As a result of the booming at-home economy, more Americans are also opting to get takeouts instead of dining out. In 2023, 74% of all restaurant traffic came from “off premises” customers — that is, from takeout and delivery — up from 61% before COVID, according to the National Restaurant Association. Therefore, gadgets that cater to home-centric dining received a special spotlight at this CES.

One innovative gadget that stood out in this regard is the Electric Salt Spoon by Kirin, designed to enhance the perception of saltiness and umami flavors in foods without adding actual salt. By applying low-voltage electric current to draw more sodium into contact with the tongue, this product aims to assist individuals on low-sodium diets by making their meals more flavorful.

The homebody economy is also boosted by the continued trend in digital health to bring clinical-grade solutions into the home. For example, startup Whythings debuted an ambitious smart mirror called Omnia, leveraging full-body scan and digital twins tech to paint a comprehensive picture of one’s overall health. In addition, South Korean condom brand BRSG turned heads on the show floor with an at-home sperm testing device, designed to provide a quick and convenient way to assess sperm quality at home, and mitigate the social stigma associated with such tests.

This trend applies to skincare and beauty brands as well. At this CES, L’Oréal debuted Cell BioPrint, a device that’s designed to analyze your skin and give personalized advice on how to slow down signs of aging. Shiseido developed a “Skin Visualizer,” a device that instantly measures and visualizes the current skin condition, aiming to provide beauty advice tailored to each individual.

As the homebody economy gets a boost from smart gadgets in food, health and wellness, and other domains, it unlocks new opportunities for brands looking to engage with consumers at home and enhance their product experiences. For example, healthcare and wellness brands can incorporate the latest fitness tech to deliver personalized workout plans or nutritional advice through smart mirrors and wearables. The goal is to become part of consumers’ daily routines at home by offering seamless, value-add interactions.

Lastly, a notable cross-category trend at this CES is just how common cross-category partnerships and collaborations have become among the exhibitors, highlighting the growing interconnectedness of various consumer industries. This is especially true for hardware makers looking to gain a competitive edge with a content partner that could enhance their product experience.

Afeela, the joint EV venture between Sony and Honda, is a prime example in this regard. By integrating Sony’s PlayStation gaming capabilities, immersive audio experiences, and access to Sony Pictures’ content library, Afeela offers a unique selling point that sets it apart in the competitive EV market. At this CES, Sony and Honda announced the pricing and preorder details for their upcoming Afeela model, starting at $ $89,900 for its base model, while also emphasizing a variety of third-party partners (see image below) that will supply in-vehicle experiences and content for Afeela.

Another good example of cross-category partnerships at this CES is Delta Airlines, which hosted a highly anticipated keynote event in the Sphere. The keynote was a spectacle unto itself, featuring multiple celebrity appearances and a Lenny Kravitz mini-concert at the end. Beyond the AI concierge and a new Tom Brady show coming to Delta flights, the airline also announced two key partnerships with YouTube and Uber, respectively, to help add value to its customer journey. The YouTube partnership will bring ad-free viewing, along with access to YouTube Music, to Delta’s seat-back screens, which will be gradually upgraded to 4K screens.

The Uber partnership, on the other hand, meant the end of Delta’s partnership with Lyft; Now SkyMiles members can earn miles when they ride with Uber or order delivery through Uber Eats. Given how airlines are basically banks nowadays that earn more from their loyalty program than plane ticket sales, the shift from Lyft to Uber, which has more users than Lyft, is sure to make Delta’s mileage program a more appealing loyalty program for more people.

Overall, this trend underscores a broader shift in the industry, where hardware makers are increasingly looking to align with content providers to create differentiated, value-added experiences. At the end of the day, these collaborations not only drive innovation but also open up new avenues for brands to deliver holistic, cross-functional experiences that cater to the evolving needs of consumers.

If you wish to learn more about the trends that emerged from this CES and their marketing implications, or simply to chat broadly about how to adapt to changing user behaviors and future-proof your brand strategies in 2025, the Lab is here to help. You can start a conversation by reaching out to Chelsea Freitas (chelsea@ipglab.com). We look forward to hearing from you!

In addition, ou can read our daily recaps of CES 2025 (Day One, Day Two, and Day Three) for a better sense of the on-the-ground conversations and momentum as the event unfolded. Thanks for reading!