Note: There’s a little gift waiting for you at the end.

Ryan Reynolds, or as most people like to call him, ‘Deadpool,’ is now worth over $350M. But mostly, It’s not because of his highly successful Hollywood career. It’s because of his business endeavors.

But he’s not a traditional businessperson like the most. He got to the position he’s in right now by following a unique business strategy.

It’s what I call the ‘Buy, Boost & Sell Strategy’.

This strategy is all based on this one thing all successful people have in common.

It’s Self-awareness.

Ryan Reynolds's success in acting mainly came from his ability to make people laugh. He knows how to get people’s attention, make them laugh, and leave them delighted.

With all due respect to his all other acting skills, we can see that he understood comedy as his biggest strength.

That’s what made him successful in Hollywood, and that’s the exact thing that made his business strategy a success.

What he did was take that strength and double down on that. It’s the core of this strategy.

With that understanding, let’s dive into the strategy. It has 3 phases.

First, everything starts with buying a stake in businesses that he believes in the potential.

But these aren’t any businesses. These are brands that have unique products and positioning but lack widespread marketing and recognition.

Aviation Gin is an excellent example of this.

Their product isn’t the average gin you see on the market. It has a botanical blend that is distinct from most classic gins in the market, which helped position itself as an authentic, premium, craft-distilled brand.

His Mint Mobile is another great example. The industry they are in is used to contracts, high-cost plans, and less flexibility. Then, all of a sudden, Mind Mobile came to the market and promised the exact opposite.

They went entirely online, cutting down all the unnecessary costs, and provided flexible contract-free wireless services for the lowest possible prices.

Both brands had a unique product and positioning. They had remarkable products, but they needed a unique marketing push.

Now, This is where the real magic happens.

In 2018, He founded his own marketing production company called Maximum Effort. Remember the viral ads from Dead Pool 2?

They’re all made by Ryan’s Maximum Efforts.

The marketing strategy behind Maximum Effort is based on two things.

First, Authentic Reynold Creatives …

Mint Mobile brand commercials are a great example of this.

Mint Mobile offers the lowest possible prices to its customers, leveraging efficiency and cost-cutting. They positioned itself as the underdog approaching big wireless.

And in multiple brand commercials done by Reynold, he emphasized that they are shooting the commercial for cheap to keep their prices low and offer the benefits back to their customers.

The campaigns are filled with great self-deprecating humor, explicit language, funny plot twists & pop culture references, and more.

The combination of all these ingredients created the marketing magic the brands needed.

They don’t spend millions to produce ads like most agencies. Instead, they went to the other extreme with relatability.

Rather than becoming like Hollywood, they became more like YouTube. Less produced but more relatable.

After all, that’s what Ryan Reynold is all about being more of a friend than a distant figure.

When your star friend endorses a brand, you’re more likely to buy from that brand.

In psychology, this is called the Halo effect, this is when a person’s likability influences on the perception on them in other areas. Or, more specifically, you can call this the celebrity endorsement effect.

In this case, over the years, Ryan Reynold built a brand that made people feel like close friends, and when he endorsed a brand, people associate his trustworthiness with the brand.

This is why Trump asked for Joe Rogan for an endorsement directly on air in a recent interview. Because He understands the power of endorsements like Joe’s.

To learn more about applying psychological biases like this, check out the free resource at the end of the article.

Back to the topic …

Then, Attention Arbitrage.

It’s about focusing on opprtunities that they can get underpriced attention.

One of the best examples of this is the commercial that Aviation Gin did a few years ago, known as the ‘Pelaton parody’ Commercial.

In 2019, Peloton ran a holiday commercial featuring Sex and the City actress Cynthia Nixon, who went viral as the Pelaton girl.

The commercial featured her as a woman who receives a Pelaton bike from her partner as a gift.

A…nd you guessed right. It backfired as the commercial got backlash for its portrayal of women.

But Ryan and his Maximum Effort saw an opportunity there.

In response to the commercial, they hired the actress and shot a funny parody commercial with her for Aviation Gin and ran it for the holiday season.

It quickly became a meme, and people began to talk about it in friend circles and share memes about it on social.

It was everywhere throughout that holiday season, elevating the brand’s presence of Aviation Gin.

Rather than paying for all the distribution of the commercial, they caught a viral moment and sparked a fire and only paid for the firewood. Distribution happened by itself, thanks to word of mouth.

Humor is what triggered the word of mouth.

Yes, the reward is big. But it’s also not a safe bet; It’s bold.

The big guys don’t do stuff like that. They aren’t just afraid of risks, but they have all these layers of management and corporate bureaucracy that prevent them from creating great stuff and betting on great opportunities.

But, Ryan’s Maximum Efforts understand how risk & reward works in marketing and advertising.

Once he elevates the valuations of the brands with marketing, he sells them.

In 2018, Aviation Gin was sold for $610M, and then Mint Mobile was sold to T-Mobile for a whopping $1.35B.

Right now, his net worth is marked at $350M, and he’s also the 5th highest paid actor in the world. The companies he sold and co-owned are valued at $14B.

Still, He hasn’t done yet.

He still drives with his unique marketing approaches for movies he acts in and companies he owns and works with.

His football club, Wrexham, and his latest movie, ‘If’, are great examples of that.

At this rate, he is well on his way to becoming a badass billionaire.

Like Jay-Z says, Reynolds isn’t a businessman. He is a business, man.

medium.com

— Your Gift Is Here —

If You Want To 10x Your Business Growth And Create A Strong Brand, This Free Resource Is For You.

If you want to grow your brand/business, you need to understand how your customer’s mind works. In this ebook, you will learn about the big 5 psychological effects that influence your customers’ buying decisions.

You will not only learn what there are in simple language, but you will also learn how to apply it to your marketing with real-life examples. Click here to download it for free.

Free Download: The Big 5 Psychological Effects To 10x Your Business Growth