For non-members, click here to read the full story.

What makes PDM, a recycled lifestyle floor mat design business whose items were not at first mainstream, thrive from zero sales in the first year to 70 million baht a year ten years later?

Talking with Doonyapol Srichan, the founder, the answer behind the success is revealed.

Believe in what we do.Even in the first year of business, when the company could not sell a single mat, Doonyapol did not give up because he believed in what he was doing.

“I do not see things like loss and profit; rather, I see things as a product. We do our best in everything,” he said.

As a designer, he believed that his product was good or nearly perfect. It was durable, had nice graphics, and was made by a skilled designer.

Most importantly, he believed in the product’s core value.

“PDM does new things with design. Its core value is to increase the value of a normal product like a mat that everyone is familiar with, by integrating design with Thai culture to make it more international,” Doonyapol explained.

These are the reasons why he kept going.

Communication is key.The solution Doonyapol decided to deal with this unsuccessful was to do more communication. He said it was important to educate people to have the same level of how he and his team loved this product.

That’s why he started learning digital marketing and creating a story about the product.

The challenge was that Thai people were not familiar with using a mat instead of a carpet. So, to bring recycled lifestyle floor mats into the market, he had to change people’s attitudes and behavior.

First, he communicated how he selected the material.

“PDM has used recycled plastic since day one,” Doonyapol said.

“As a designer, thinking about the environment is a top priority in the design process,” he added.

Moreover, he communicated the quality of the recycled floor mat and its utility.

Empathize with what we don’t understand.

“I believe in ‘Design Thinking,’” Doonyapol said.

The first and most important stage of ‘Design Thinking,’ apart from defining, ideating, prototyping, and testing, is empathizing. The founder believes that starting with empathy for something we don’t understand allows us to use design to create a new process that makes the entire picture flow.

He also uses ‘empathy’ when collaborating with other brands.

“We listen to them carefully, what they want or why they come to work with us. Most importantly, we share the core value of design together.”

Creativity is in everything.

“I think everything is based on creativity,” he said.

Not only in design, but he also uses the creative process to communicate with others, even with an accountant who works with numbers, saying that it helps the conversation flow.

Go with the flow when facing storms.When Doonyapol experiences situations he cannot control, such as the nation’s economic condition, he learns to go with the flow.

“We have to focus on what we have and continue doing what we do,” he added.

As an entrepreneur and as a brand, the way they survive is by constantly coming up with ideas and selecting the best ones to manufacture with the right materials.

That’s what they can do when storms come.