Shakespeare uses the natural world’s changes as a metaphor for aging in his “Sonnet 73.” Throughout the sonnet, Shakespeare describes beautiful scenes in nature of the sun setting and the seasons shifting towards winter. Both of these scenes suggest an “end.”

“When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang

Upon those boughs which shake against the cold” (Shakespeare 303).

The warm weather is fading and only a few yellow leaves hang on to the branches. In summer we can assume that the branches were laden with green leaves, full of color and life. As the season progressed and the tree became older the leaves turned yellow and are now falling off. The bright lively colors are fading. In the same way, as people age, their energy slowly declines. They lose the color in their hair. Their once strong bodies shake in the cold, the same way the now empty boughs shake.

“In me thou seest the twilight of such day” (303).

Twilight can be thought of as the end of the day when the sun sets and the sky darkens. Twilight can also be used to describe a gradual decline. The speaker suggests that the gradual decline or the end of something, perhaps his life, is seen in him. After the long season of color and life, or the bright day, the sun sets. The speaker’s life is setting, hovering between the bright livelihood of youth and the slow, darker tones of night and death.

“In me thou seest the glowing of such fire

That on the ashes of his youth doth lie” (303).

Though the flame of his life may be small compared to his youth, it does still burn. It burns on the remembrance of one’s youth. By remembering the lively days of the past, the speaker is able to convey a nostalgic feeling. Even though the speaker knows that death is near, as his youth lies in ashes, the fire of life is still visible. The small flame that flickers upon the ashes, remembering the past and making the speaker stronger.

Shakespeare, William. “Sonnet 73.” An Exaltation of Forms: Contemporary Poets Celebrate the Diversity of Their Art. Edited by Annie Finch and Kathrine Varnes, U of Michigan P, 2002, p. 303

Hacker, Marilyn. “The Sonnet” An Exaltation of Forms: Contemporary Poets Celebrate the Diversity of Their Art. Edited by Annie Finch and Kathrine Varnes, U of Michigan P, 2002, p. 297–307