Welcome to Marketing Chronicles. A newsletter where marketers come for expert industry commentary at the intersection of strategy and creativity — every Wednesday sent before daybreak. If you like what you see, join us for free here.

Recently, I’ve written a column on how to write effective creative briefs. In it, I unpacked some of the things one should include in those documents and how the creative department is that “3rd customer” that planners must keep in mind.

So, this week I want to say a few words about delivering creative feedback.

It’s a meandering part of the process that follows the briefing, with the aim to help the creative department to get to the best possible idea and execution that delivers on said creative brief.

Yet, delivering creative feedback is one of those skills that very rarely are taught in school, and therefore is seldom done effectively. The average marketer will learn how to deliver creative feedback by word-of-mouth, from a colleague’s experience, or base their perspective on a manager’s POV on the matter.

But I’m here today to tell you that there is a method to the madness.

Before we unpack how to deliver great creative feedback, we must first be clear about what it’s not deemed effective creative feedback.

“It doesn’t feel right.”

“Can you make the logo bigger?”

“Can you make it ‘pop’ more?”

“The client won’t go for it.”

These are some of your classic creativity killers. Feedback that doesn’t accomplish much and creates unnecessary tension between planners and creatives.

We could group bad feedback into 3 “flavours”:

The core reason behind why these three types of bad feedback are ineffective is because they are directive in nature. They prescribe a solution, they are too vague, often hugely subjective in nature, and disregard what stage in the creative process the work is in.

This typically leads to work that aims to simply gain “approval” by the client as opposed to pushing it to creative effectiveness territory — one in which innovation and a certain degree of risk-taking is required.

And here’s where we enter a critical distinction in feedback mentality that we must be acutely aware off: criticism vs. critique.

Critiques (aka, ‘crits’) always win.

Creative feedback sessions begin far before the meetings themselves.

It demands that both feedback-seekers and feedback-givers prepare in advance for it in order to make the most out of it.

And above all else, it starts from holding a safe space to be creative.

When creatives put something in front of anyone, they’re sharing something about themselves in a way. It reflects their experiences, interpretation of the world, and to a certain extent their taste. It’s a vulnerable ‘leap of faith’ that requires all those involved to be laser focused on strengthening the WORK.

No one should ever feel threatened, embarrassed, “called-out”, or judged. This environment of empathy is the foundation for effective creative cultures.

Secondly, there should always be objectives tied to the work — be clear about what we are evaluating to work against.

All creativity within an agency aims to solve a problem. This problem should be highlighted in the creative brief and become the North Star for everything that follows.

Sure, sometimes as the creative process rolls on, the creative team might come back to the strategy team and recommend to rethink the problem as they’ve uncovered new insights that could better position the work. In these not-so-rare situations, the planner should be open to re-contextualizing the work. But this should never be done without broad alignment between creatives, account directors, and strategists.

When we evaluate creative relative to its expected effectiveness against a set of goals, it all becomes much easier to discuss the work and move it down the field.

Thirdly, timing is key.

Ideas go through several stages before they come to life. As Darrin Henein describes — there are levels of fidelity that we must be aware of so that creatives seek the right type of feedback and walk away with what they need.

Therefore, creatives can be strategic in how they seek feedback by:

So, before going into that meeting to discuss the work, keep the following in mind:

Feedback Seeker

Feedback Giver

Contrary what what many believe, creative feedback is best given in with our ‘analytical’ minds as opposed to our creative minds. There are pros and cons to each mode of thinking, but when seeking for commentary outside of the creative department that’s when creatives can really tap into the “neural network” of critical thinking embedded throughout their agency.

I love this metaphor from strategist Heidi Hackemer in her class titled Ridiculously Good Creative Feedback. Think of it as if you were building a house. You wouldn’t ask the architect in your first meeting that you wanted a blue living room. You’d first discuss the style of home you’re seeking to live in, how many rooms, bathrooms, etc.

It’s imperative that as feedback-givers we do not hit our creatives with tiny stuff before the big stuff is in place. Because as we fix the big stuff and the overall frame of an idea, the execution of it will naturally morph with it.

There is no single way to deliver great feedback, each person brings their own biases into it (which are not a bad thing when strategically placed in the feedback session) what makes the process of developing creative work ever so exciting.

Remember, creativity by nature is innovative. It’s not formulaic or a concoction of “best practices”. It’s risky and has tremendous upside because of it.

But there are ways to best position the process of creative development to achieve what it aims to achieve. By avoiding the below common pitfalls, we give ourselves a better chance to ship our best work:

1. Don’t lead the audience

2. Steer clear of individual preferences

3. Resist the urge to offer solutions

4. Be careful not to overwhelm

5. Know how to articulate your choices

Now that we have some rough do’s and don’ts of creative feedback, how do we know we’re on our way to building a high-performing creative culture within our organizations?

Remember, creativity is not exclusive to creative agencies — across all business types we are faced with challenges to solve. It’s not something reserved just to art directors and copywriters (though the extent to which they leverage this skill to make a living is markedly higher).

Whether we are solving problems or identifying the right ones to go after, becoming laser-focused in fostering a high-performing creative culture will build trust among our teams all the while winning in the market.

Sign #1: Empathy

When creatives put something in front of others, they’re inherently exposing a part of themselves. Vulnerability is hard, specially at work, so have empathy when providing feedback.

Sign #2: Strategic first, creative second

Know which stage of the creative process one is at and provide the appropriate type of feedback based off that.

Sign #3: Problems, not solutions

Never underestimate your creatives’ ability to solve problems. Focus on the problem, not the solution — particularly in the earlier stages of the process.

Sign #4: Remain customer-centric

Customer-centricity is marketer’s superpower. Remember that we’re not the audience and that personal preferences are irrelevant.

Sign #5: Practice emotional intelligence

When coming from a good place, 95% the time great creatives welcome feedback. If the session is getting tense, change the energy in the room. Lead with confident kindness.

As mentioned earlier, creativity is a close cousin to risk-taking. It’s inevitable that sometimes we will miss a shot, but by staying true to effective creative feedback practices we remain on the path to building a winning creative culture that compounds wins over time.

PPA

Pedro Porto Alegre is a seasoned marketing professional with in-depth experience building brand and communications strategies for top-tier B2C and B2B organizations across Canada. His repertoire extends from crafting and executing integrated multi-media brand marketing campaigns to the commercialization of performance-driven innovations for multimillion-dollar and nascent brands alike.

Originally published at https://marketing-chronicles-newsletter.beehiiv.com.