Accepting doesn’t mean giving up, but improving and learning to be better.

How can I face the world if I can’t face myself? Can’t control myself? I feel demotivated sometimes, confused about myself, what’s wrong with me? I started to move away from the things around me when I felt unlived, life was heavy, and stressful.

One day — at the end of the semester, I cried hard all day in my room just because I saw my grades for the semester. I asked myself — am I failing? What if I can’t be the person I want to be? What if I can’t continue my studies? What if I can’t get the job I want after graduation? What if no one is proud of me? My anxiety took over me.

But life doesn’t end when you get bad grades, right?

I asking my lecture — “There is chance for me to fix my grades, Sir?”. I can’t stop crying when I read next message, he apologized and said, “Next semester there is still a chance to improve your grades, keep up your enthusiasm, you can do it!”.

During my time in college, I also faced several failures, failed student exchange abroad, failed government internships, failed English tests, failed conferences abroad. But despite that, I still tried all the things I wanted, because it’s better to be sad for not getting it than to regret not trying.

Because life doesn’t end when you fail, right?

Maybe our opportunities are elsewhere or even better than what we expect, that’s why we should never give up on what we dream of. We need to look at things in a different way. Then I realized, Sometimes things don’t work out the way we expect them to. We have to accept that we can’t force everything in this life.

I try to let go of everything that happens. We feel pain because of our own hopes and expectations — just like people come and go, let go of people who want to go from your life, you don’t need to keep them, just let it go! Because we will meet better people in the future.

I accept that everything that happens in this world has a lesson. Accepting everything does not mean we give up in this life, what is meant by acceptance is how we are sincere and not angry at things that are beyond our control, such as the philosophy of Stoicism, a teaching that emphasizes calmness and focuses on what can be controlled by oneself to get happiness.

Accepting is also a way of honoring God for the life we have been given while trying to live it well. Let’s be happy in this life and accept the good things that will come!