If you start affiliate marketing, you don’t care about what you do. You just want the commission.

Are you aware that what you do most matters? Those are the little things that produce most of the results.

Most beginners think that they have to find a way to bypass the basics. They forget to understand that the basics will become the entity that will possess them

until they start earning commissions.

Believe in yourself.

I always say this, there is nothing in this world that you can not achieve. No matter how hard you think it is.

If a man with flesh and blood has been able to achieve, why don't believe in yourself that you can also do it?

It goes to say if someone can do it, so can you.

To take traffic control into your own hands and do something about it, you first need to

You are with a friend.

Explaining to him how X products work. If I may ask, would you try to sound too professional or will you sound friendly?

That is your marketing plan. You should write, try to convince, solve, and promote to only one person.

By so doing you elevate your marketing experience.

The person feels like you are talking to him or her alone. which makes your content more engaging,

Content that feels friendly and becomes shareable even if it has not been asked to be shared. When someone shares the content then that is where the

ripple effect comes into play.

The rise of AI means you can create mass content.

Remember this. AI is not human. It can’t feel the emotions we feel, your content creation must have a feeling.

You writing content for humans, not AI. Only humans can make money which equals to only humans can buy.

If you do not rely on emotion and psychology.

Then you are an AI content creator. It does not matter if you wrote the content yourself you are still an AI.

Yes, you can create content with AI. Breathe life into them, making them more magnet that pulls people by just simply adding the HUMAN TOUCH.

It makes people come and come and come back again.

Put SEO aside now.

Focus on social media. It is your greatest weapon against anti-traffic. Once people think what you post matters.

They will flock in millions to your site. I always say this. If you could get 0.001 % of the users of social media.

Then you could make millions of dollars.

Using social media to control traffic should be higher than anything. You won’t regret it.

If you have an email list available

Then. You have existing traffic sources. If you don’t have one, start building some.

Email list is a kind of traffic you control. Is two things, is one. You should start creating newsletters to get them back to your site.

Or you keep them sitting there forever.

You are going to start getting traffic to your site in no time.

When people share with others. It creates a ripple effect that makes a lot of people know you.

You have not been left behind.

All you have to do is do everything not by accident but by intention.

If you have any questions or comments, drop them below. Oh, and by the way, I help affiliate marketers turn visitors into buyers by writing blogs that guide them to the affiliate links.

Want more tips like this? Hit follow and join me on this journey. Let’s grow together, and I’ll send you exclusive insights straight to your feed.