I was en route to Northumberland a few weeks back to attend my first photography tour as a guest tutor with Light & Land when my phone buzzed. It was an unusual message from my sister asking me to call her when I next had the chance. I drove on for a little while before pulling over at a service station just outside of Leeds to make the call to her as she waited patiently back in Welshpool to deliver the most surprising news. My father had passed away in the night. She had just been informed by one of our long-lost cousins that he had been found in his bed that morning. He went to sleep on Sunday night and hadn’t opened his eyes to the Monday sun rise.

I hadn’t seen my father since I was a young boy. My mother left him for another man after being beaten black and blue one too many times. We moved away to Loughborough and left our old lives and him behind. He went on to visit us only once in our new home. Apparently, he was threatened by my new stepfather on the doorstep as he went to leave that day and forced to stay away from the family.

Indeed, he did just that. Thirty years passed and I didn’t hear a word from him. To be honest, I was never too disappointed. I had never harboured too much interest in meeting him. He didn’t sound like the most interesting man, choosing to live a less-than-conscious life, and I always questioned what kind of example he would set if I were to ever cross paths with him. He had taught me more than enough indirectly, I always thought. Albeit, I only had a projection, formed by my abused mothers’ opinion and her stories of him in my mind, which, perhaps, were never an accurate reflection of who he truly was. In my immature mind, she was an angel of light, and him; a demon of complete darkness. My adult mind understands that nobody is all of one or the other. Through my photographic education I have learnt that there is no light without darkness, and vice versa.

In the absence of my father, I have had to father myself for much of my life. In recent times, many of the trees that I have visited have become like the father that I never had — strong, stable, rooted, grounded and present. It could be said that in my world, there is a ‘Father Nature’ as well as the great Mother. Nature has helped me to make peace with and find acceptance for my father, and provided space for me to reflect and understand the complex relationship that I had with him, and, therefore, myself.

In recent times, I have felt a curiosity about the man that fathered me thirty-three years ago, even entertaining the idea of one day meeting him. I wanted to get to know him for myself. Through my own intimate relationship, I have been introduced to many new sides of myself. I thought that meeting him might help me to meet many more sides, too, and contribute to a further deepening of my relationship with Darcia. I had been close to reaching out to him to arrange a visit on a few occasions but something inside of me prevented that from happening — perhaps it was procrastination, or maybe it was fate.

When the news broke during my journey north, I could not quite believe the timing. I had even entertained the absurd thought in recent weeks that he might well die before I reach out to him. I set out upon my way after hanging up the phone, feeling numb and confused, with hints of regret surfacing because of my hesitance to make contact with him to arrange a meeting. During the second half of the journey, I managed to shed a few tears of grief whilst thinking about the conversations that I will never get to have. The grief of this loss, however, was something that I had been feeling throughout my entire life, and it quickly began to feel like there was nothing left to feel.

Despite my difficulties accessing the depths of my emotional landscape, I spent the rest of my tour coming to terms with the fact that I would never get to meet my father in physical form. Although it was meant to be a tour where I observed current Light & Land tutors, Bill Ward and Verity Milligan, and studied the workings of a tour, I couldn’t help but spend the majority of each day wandering alone with just my camera and the landscape for company.

The art of photography has been instrumental in my life since I picked up the camera back in 2018. If it weren’t for the discovery of this creative practice and the meaning that it offered me, I wouldn’t like to know where I might be now. Through my photographs, I have been able to speak a language that is beyond words and express some of my deepest and most complex emotions, transmuting pain and unburdening my heavy load.

Upon ‘feeling’ anything significant as I move through life, Nature has become my place to escape; a sanctuary in which to rest and reflect, and the camera; my best friend. Every click of my cameras’ shutter allows me to share a piece of my soul. My art, therefore, gives purpose to my struggles and woes, allowing me to create something beautiful out of the unfathomable ugliness that inevitably creeps up on all of us at one point or another throughout this existence. I am grateful to have had more than my fair share of this ugliness throughout my younger years. Stories of my father and memories from my turbulent youth have left many scars on my soul, but they are scars that I now wear with great pride. I know that my art would not have been made possible without them.

I went on to create a handful of meaningful photographs during the trip as we explored the dunes at Bamburgh, the golden sands of Budle Bay, Dunstanburgh Castle and Lindisfarne. These photographs might not be worthy of winning any awards, but, to me, they are some of the most beautiful that I have created since the dawn of my time as an artist.

They stand to serve as a milestone in my life, and help me to tell the story of a man coming to terms with loss and a lifetime of grief. I dealt with that loss in the only way that I know how; by using my pain to fuel creativity because that, I believe, is the only option that we have as human beings if we are to prevent a descent into our own pit of darkness.

I do not wish to be a man that sits and dwells upon his own experiences, becoming a victim and complaining about the cards that were dealt to me. With that being said, I have had more than my fair share of, perhaps, unplayable hands, but I am managing to craft something out of them and forge a life of tremendous purpose through my creativity.

As I sat for a while on a bench at Lindisfarne watching the sun set on the final day, I allowed my experiences to sink in; looking backwards to move forwards. Too often, we are guilty of going from one place to the next without ever allowing ourselves to sit in stillness and reflect upon the events that have carved the landscape of our own inner worlds.

News of my fathers passing was the most significant news that I have ever received, and will, hopefully, receive for some time. In the wake of that call, I felt a significant deepening of my soul as I wandered along the beaches of Northumberland. In truth, I have felt a large a part of my soul dying away for sometime. I think I left it behind with the winds that swept the beaches.