In many cases, designing the footer is an afterthought, the last thing we do before finishing a layout. It is also common that we create a very creative hero section, then as we design the page section by section, the level of creativity decreases, and we end up with a very generic footer — and this is a missed opportunity, footers can add so much value to your designs!

There is a myth about scrolling: “users don’t scroll”. This is wrong. Users do scroll, however, you need to signal that “there is more” (~teasing continuation).

This is how users apply footers:

A footer can have many roles, here are some of them:

Consider adding these to your footer:

Avoid creating unnecessarily cluttered footers! Ask the question: what is your context?

Naturally, you should design your footer in a way that it serves your context. Here are some examples for types and contexts:

Progressive disclosure is about gradually revealing information or features (showing things needed at a given point vs. everything all at once).

Teasing continuation is a technique that helps us encourage users to continue (e.g. by using visual cues or text). That way, you can avoid creating a so-called false bottom. So you should suggest that users should scroll down.

What to do in case of using infinite scroll (so that users can’t reach the footer):

Footer reveal pattern example:

Mini footer pattern example:

You should also think about making it responsive: how to design your footer for the different viewport sizes.

Adding animations and microinteractions can make your footer more effective (e.g. think about the branding and emotinal design aspects).

One more piece of advice is that you should conduct research, e.g. you can apply a so-called scroll heatmap.

You should end on a high note, and create a footer that’s memorable and adds real value to your design. Think about how you can best utilize this often neglected design pattern: what are the business goals? And the user goals?

www.footer.design

www.awwwards.com

muz.li

www.awwwards.com

www.unsection.com

designsystem.digital.gov

hds.hel.fi

If you like my sketches, buy me a coffee to support my work! Thanks, I really appreciate your encouragement! 🙏

Check out the Sketching for UX Designers course on Udemy, use the coupon code SKETCHFORUX202501 to get 80% off! Click here to apply the code.

You can subscribe to my Sketching for UX newsletter to get early access to my newest UX Knowledge Piece Sketch (and receive it directly to your inbox each month). I also share my favorite design and visual thinking links.

Get my Sketching for UX Designers Workbook here for free (and you can choose to support me by paying a couple of dollars, I really appreciate your support!)

You can also grab a copy of my 100-day Long UX Visual Library Building Challenge book (also on a pay-what-you-want basis).

💬Please let me know what you think, I always appreciate you feedback!

www.nngroup.com

www.hotjar.com

www.nngroup.com

blog.hubspot.com

www.smashingmagazine.com