“Is February too late to do a Game of the Year list? No? All right, cool.”

Hello and welcome, ladies and gentlemen, to that special time of the year. Yep, it’s award season, which means I’ve got a butt load of words and a whole list of awesome games to go over.

Normally, this would be the part where I talk about some of the notable events of 2024, highlight how the gaming landscape has changed or ramble on about how hard it was to finalize my favorite games over the last year. Instead, I’m going to keep it short because I’m already a month past my original due date and I know most of you want to get to the good stuff.

And good stuff is the gist of 2024. About every month last year produced at least one title of interest, far too many for me to go over in finer detail. My one saving grace last year was the gaming PC I had purchased long ago that had been relegated to private and professional work, including many of the articles I wrote over the last two years. 2024 was really the year I started to realize just how big the gaming ecosystem truly is when you have access to decent hardware. Games that would have never entered my radar went from “neat, I’ll wait for the console release” to “oh yeah, I have a gaming PC now!”

This is all to say I played a good number of games despite my irregular schedule and commitments. Not as many as I would have liked, including several notable exclusions (sorry, I don’t have a PS5!), but enough to say that this was one of my favorite lists to compile since I started writing regularly.

Well, I think that’s enough of an introduction. Here it is, my Top 10 Games of 2024:

If there was a recurring theme in 2024 that was quickly burned into my brainhole, it was to expect the unexpected now that I’ve been getting more mileage out of my gaming PC. I had to quickly abandon my preconceived notions of what a video game is and start dipping my arm into the metaphorical hole in the wall to see what came out on the other end, starting with a small little trip towards a certain English town.

Developed by Coal Supper, Thank Goodness You’re Here! is a delightfully absurd, tightly written package of a game where you play — as my sister aptly put it while watching me play one afternoon — “a little guy who goes around slapping people.” Also, you’re a salesman who has an appointment to meet the mayor, but that’s beside the point because all you need to know is there is a dedicated SLAP button. Take that as you will.

From the moment you’re set loose on the denizens of Bansworth to the bizarre buildup of comedic moments in between helping the locals — often to amusingly destructive results — Thank Goodness You’re Here!’s simplicity is complemented by its unabashedly British delivery of its punchlines and relatively brief runtime.

As I was putting together this list and revising my entries, I kept thinking back to Coal Supper’s self-described “slapformer.” It may not be the most narrative or mechanically complex game featured here, but I’d be hard pressed to find a title that left such a memorable first impression. Even among my picks further down, I couldn’t resist cracking a smile when I looked back at my time as the “little guy” who throws hands, to say nothing of the other cast of weirdos and their meat flavored opinions of pies.

With its sharply written comedy and unconventional game format, Thank Goodness You’re Here! is an appetizing treat baked to golden brown perfection — cheers mate.

No list of mine would be complete without at least one monstrous entry which brings me to Kill Knight (KILL KNIGHT), a title that left such an impression on me during the Steam Next Fest that I kept the demo on my computer in the leadup to its release. While 2024 had no shortage of excellent shooters and indie “murder gauntlets,” PlaySide Studios rose to the occasion with one of the most cathartic experiences I’ve played since Doom (2016).

A top-down arcade style shooter set across five stages of increasing demon hordes, Kill Knight captures the essence of what I love about twin stick shooters with a devilish modern spin on the formula. Ripping a page out of Doom Eternal’s playbook, the titular knight comes equipped with your standard pistols, shotgun, sword, dash and a powerful burst, each with their own intricacies and combo potential when used strategically.

This small but versatile loadout truly shines in Kill Knight’s moment-to-moment gameplay, providing additional incentive to maximize your knight’s entire toolkit. As new weapons unlock, these alternates mix up the combat, adding additional customization when tackling one of the game’s five layers. To give one example, the Swiftshade turns your standard sword into a three-hit combo and special into a whirling circle of death, negating projectiles entirely.

In a year that’s been filled to the brim with fun, experimental and visceral titles, Kill Knight is a glorious nod to old school arcade style games with a touch of the macabre I can’t help but adore. What more do I have to say? Kill Knight rules.

With the Switch 2 on the horizon, Nintendo had a predominantly quiet 2024. Mostly relying on rereleases and a few fun but safe new entries in established IP, I don’t think it would be a stretch to say this was one of the company’s weaker years as it prepares for its upcoming console.

To that end, The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom arrives at an interesting point in the franchise. A soft return to form to the gameplay format made famous by the original The Legend of Zelda and A Link to the Past, Echoes of Wisdom makes a bold attempt to bridge the gap in the wake of its recent 3D counterparts.

For the most part, Echoes of Wisdom succeeds at finding a happy medium in a post Breath of the Wild world. Seeing iconic Zelda creatures and enemies reimagined with the Link’s Awakening (2019) art style and the return of traditional dungeons after half a decade was a welcome treat as a long time veteran and someone starting to feel the burn from two back-to-back 80+ hour RPGs — more on that later.

Outside of a few spin offs, the switch from Link to Zelda adds a fresh dimension to the 2D formula. Eschewing traditional dungeon tools for magic and summoning via the new Echoes, your initially small catalog of creatures becomes a crucial component in your adventure as familiar puzzles are remixed through experimentation, ingenuity and a light case of freak accidents. Even after completing it, I was genuinely impressed with everything I missed in my playthrough. Echoes I never encountered, sequence breaking shortcuts and entire sub quests that didn’t become apparent until the credits rolled, to name a few.

For a first attempt at creating a much more open ended 2D Zelda, the team at Grezzo tapped into something special when designing for their primary audience. A detail that was not lost on many of my favorite personalities from around the web, several of whom played it with family and people who have never picked up a Zelda title, let alone a video game.

Whether you’ve been with the series from the beginning or coming in for the first time, The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom is an incredible achievement. It may not reach the high watermarks of its predecessors, but in return it becomes the link between the past and future of the series — a Zelda game for everyone.

Of all the games on this list, Animal Well had the misfortune of releasing at a critical turning point in my life — the week that I left my longtime writing publisher of five years. Having wrapped up a major writing project at the time, I was in no headspace to start something new. At least, that’s what I would have said if I hadn’t already started exploring the depths of Billy Basso’s esoteric debut title (yes, it’s that good)!

A search action platformer or Metroidvania published by Big Mode that’s heavy on the search side of the coin, words fail to capture the level of creative ingenuity on display in Animal Well. Harking back to the pre-Internet days where game manuals were king and secrets were passed down by word of mouth, Animal Well recaptures that familiar sense of discovery for the Internet age.

The same can be said about Animal Well’s cryptic progression. Simple tools like a bubble wand, yo-yo and slinky are given unexpected utilities, relying on player intuition to parse out their functionality rather than explaining it directly. The act of retreading previous areas goes beyond simple memorization of unreachable areas or objects of interest. As you further explore the dark corners of the well, the underlying mystery of the world leaves more questions than answers.

Animal Well is a game of secrets upon secrets, one that rarely left my mind despite my relatively short playtime. Though the requirements to see the true ending are beyond my means (and patience), the fact that it had the confidence to leave much of its world undefined for the community to parse through is a testament to Basso’s knack for game design.

As for Big Mode, I don’t know what kind of connections videogamedunkey has, but if this is the level of talent we can expect from their future collaborations, then we are going to be eating well for years to come.

The only entry on this list that did not release in 2024, but did receive a new mobile port via Netflix (the version I played for reference), Katana Zero has the unique honor of being one of the best and most frustrating (in a good way) games I played last year. Not because of a lack of resolution — a discussion for another time — but rather I was left wanting more.

Between the blood pumping stages and digitally infused synthwave soundtrack, what kept me glued beyond the combat was Katana Zero’s story and presentation. Cinematic games have come a long way in terms of technology, but a game that explores the boundaries of its medium through the player are a rare breed. Multiple dialogue trees along with the ability to interrupt almost any piece of dialogue was some of the most fun I’ve had with a video game story.

Speaking of, I can’t praise enough how Katana Zero presents its protagonist’s drug fueled hallucinations. For a game that spends most of its time empowering the player as ruthless assassin Zero, that slow loss of identity and control is felt sharply whenever the game deliberately takes control away from you the player. It’s all creatively realized with some truly wild alternate cutscenes the further depraved your antihero becomes.

Outside of one minor annoyance regarding the Android port’s “crouch” detection and some mixed feelings about the ending, I’m glad I was able to cross this indie gem off my checklist in 2024. Five years after its initial release, Katana Zero’s lightning-fast gameplay and pulp action storytelling remains a cut above the rest.

Unless you were somehow living under a rock, you’ve likely heard of Metaphor: ReFantaszio. “Critically acclaimed RPG, Game of the Year nominee and contender for the most stylized menus of any title,” the mystery fantasy project by Studio Zero and the architects behind Persona 3 had a lot going for it in the lead up to its release. So much that I had to delay this article a month to sink my teeth into it!

In the wake of Persona 3 Reload’s enjoyable but familiar retread, Metaphor was precisely what I was looking for as far as the natural evolution of the Persona and Shin Megami Tensei formulas. A sharpened class and combat system, a much more interesting bond (“followers”) tree and the ability to skip lower-level enemy encounters entirely, Studio Zero went above and beyond to refine and rework a lot of the “busy work” of the genre while innovating in unexpected ways.

(Also, there’s a skateboard sword. I’m just putting that out there.)

As someone who is no stranger to high fantasy, I have to commend Metaphor’s take on the genre. Its mix of technology, lore and other bits of world building, combined with that trademark slickness of previous works is evident in its storytelling as much as its menus and soundtrack. Even on PS4 where my console is beginning to show its age, it’s a pretty game to behold, more so in its politically driven tale and not-so-subtle *ahem* metaphors in your quest for the throne.

Metaphor: ReFantazio’s cross-examination of democracy through fiction is idealistic to a fault, but its heart is no less prominent. In an age of uncertainty, Studio Zero’s debut title is a refreshing tale of fantasy that will no doubt inspire the next generation of RPGs. After all, “hope is only a step behind a clear conscience.”

As I started to wind the list down to my top contenders, I had a hard time pinpointing where to put Elden Ring: Shadow of the Erdtree. And before you ask, yes, DLC expansions should be eligible for game of the year, and it shouldn’t have taken this release to acknowledge this. Frankly, I’m shocked the Game Awards hadn’t been including them until recently!

The gargantuan expansion to From Software’s masterpiece, I had a great time getting reacquainted with my 2022 game of the year as I slipped back into my Tarnished like a familiar glove — only to promptly be killed near the starting area by a new foe. Instead of building upward, Shadow of the Erdtree takes us further into the depths, remixing your familiarity with the base game into something familiar yet terrifyingly deep.

Throughout my adventure, I saw realms beyond belief, monsters approaching biblical proportions and forgotten history that recontextualized what I knew about The Lands Between. Outside the extravagant vistas and hidden catacombs, Shadow of the Erdtree ups the challenge by forcing the player to adapt against greater beasts, with various new weapons and subsystems to discover. Within my own greatsword and shield combo, I found myself experimenting more with magic in this expansion than I did with the main campaign!

Having poured over 100 hours, there’s no denying that the fire still burns brightly at From Software. With its deceptively clever open world design, challenging encounters and some of the greatest boss fights in the business, Elden Ring: Shadow of the Erdtree continues their legacy as the masters of their craft.

When I first heard about Like a Dragon: Infinite Wealth, the 8th installment in the formerly named Yakuza series, I was beginning to feel somewhat fatigued. Hot off the heels of not one, but two games, as well as bringing back former protagonist Kazuma Kiryu for the third time, all eyes were on Ryu Ga Gotoku Studio to commit to Yakuza: Like A Dragon’s new RPG direction and wrap up Kiryu’s story (again) by setting the stage for Ichiban Kasuga’s new Hawaiian adventure.

Thankfully, Infinite Wealth proves that RGG Studio hasn’t lost their touch. Taking full advantage of the Hawaiian setting, the returning job system has been fully revamped, trading the previous installment’s gig economy theme for a sillier take on Americana and the tourism industry.

There’s the usual Yakuza flavor of minigames, soap opera theatrics and weirdos to hang out with, but where Infinite Wealth earns its money is its characters and writing. Kasuga’s rags-to-riches story in the previous game is spun up further when a scandal begins a wild goose chase that eventually leads to an unlikely reunion.

Looking back on it, I don’t think it was a coincidence Infinite Wealth arrived at a critical moment in my life. It’s a messy story that jumps the shark a few times (literally), but one that resonated with me harder than a bicycle to the face.

Like Persona 3 FES before it, Like a Dragon: Infinite Wealth is a reminder of the true infinite wealth — the power of a friend in need.

Before writing these lists, I like to make small notes to myself. When I went through the UFO 50 entry, I found I had scribbled down “the most video game-ass-video game of 2024.” A throwback to the byte era of games, Mossmouth’s retro collection is without a doubt a unicorn in terms of scope and ambition. Moving past the sheer quantity, the game stands out as a celebratory and reflective look of the medium.

Boasting 50 games across various genres, UFO 50 all but guarantees you’ll find something that speaks to you, regardless of taste and preferences. Platformers, RPGs, racing, sports and even a full-on retro fighter reminiscent of Super Smash Bros., the variety on display and quality is nothing short of a technical delight. To highlight some personal favorites:

Putting aside the value and quality of individual titles, what impresses me most is the level of constraint the developers at Mossmouth imposed on themselves. From remaining strictly within the limitations of the era and technology to ensuring that each title maintained its fictional timeline of events, this six-person team could have simply put out “a collection of good games” on Steam and called it a day — but that’s only the cherry on top.

Playing each game chronologically, a narrative begins to form showing the evolution of the elusive UFOsoft throughout the years. Entire sequels for previous entries on the list, callbacks to other titles, hidden messages and other anomalies, there is a staggering amount of depth that players are still uncovering to this day.

None of these extra facets take away from the base package, but when you stop to consider these “games within games” that most people will never see, I think it speaks volumes to the level of attention and care that went into UFO 50. Even though I still have one more entry on this list to go over, I cannot recommend it enough.

Play UFO 50 — play forever.

In a year that felt like almost any game could be a legitimate GOTY contender, I struggled with my list more than usual. I played massive RPGs, arcade-heavy action titles, far too many platformers to count, not to mention a 50-in-one collection. To say 2024 was competitive would be a massive understatement — it was a great year for games. But when the dust settled, there was one title that fittingly enough, managed to overcome the nine challengers I had set forth at the start of this piece.

Of course, I’m talking about Nine Sols, Red Candle Games’s Taopunk-infused take on the Metroidvania formula. At a time where the genre has been flourishing thanks in large part to the indie scene, as well as the return of some long dormant franchises, the Taiwanese studio’s latest project came as a surprise following their previous pair of horror-centric titles.

Once more looking to East Asian culture and mythology as their basis, Nine Sols’s vengeance-fueled meets spiritual enlightenment tale brings some much-needed character to New Kunlun’s isolated facilities in the form of its catlike protagonist.

A scientist and holder of the Sol Seal of Innovation ( “Ji”), Yi is a fascinating character for a man of few words. He’s logical and has trouble identifying with the unexplained, including his own “immortality.” He’s a dedicated older brother despite not always showing it. He can be heroic and noble or exceedingly cruel depending on the situation. At times, he’s a badass warrior while at other moments he can cut loose when booze or his trusty medicinal pipe is involved — and yes, there are gameplay elements and upgrades tied to these activities!

For a genre made famous for providing a sense of “isolation,” often putting players in the shoes of a silent protagonist in an alien world with little to no context, I did not know how much I missed playing a character with personality until Nine Sols. The story doesn’t hold back either, providing a thoughtful meditation on life and death, spirituality and an ending so provocative, the hours spent on the final boss felt akin to a distant memory rather than mere moments ago.

Then there’s the star of the show — the gameplay. Taking large inspiration from Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, Nine Sols tests your mettle and reaction skills through its unique parrying system. As someone who generally dislikes parrying as the primary mechanic for dealing damage, its challenging bosses cemented themselves as some of my favorite duels last year outside Shadow of the Erdtree. Not since Sekiro have I felt this level of satisfaction as I graduated from a general understanding of the mechanics to deflecting previously unblockable moves with a well-timed reaction of my own.

Moments that could have turned frustrating in similar games became badges of honor as I rolled into the final area with a newfound appreciation for what I had learned — just as soon as I learned to respect an unblockable projectile from a half a screen over! Setting a new gold standard for Metroidvanias with its challenging but fair combat, complex main character and engaging story that kept me glued to the end, Nine Sols earns its seal of innovation as my game of the year.

And there you have it, my top 10 games of 2024. This was an eventful year to say the least. For those new here, I pretty much do this annually at this point. But that’s enough about me — tell me about you.

What were your favorite games of 2024?

Thanks for reading! If you enjoyed this piece and want to support the work I do, liking and sharing these posts are the most direct methods. This way, I can spend more time pursuing the independent writing I want for the readers who enjoy this type of content, such as yourself.

For more weirdness, check out my cabinet of curiosities over on my main Medium page or follow me on social media @TheGrimAether where I post other oddities and share previews of what I’m working on next.

Dark Aether