If you’ve been reading my articles and essays long enough, you know that I often hear about new autism research through TikTok.

However, I then look up the studies that people are citing to corroborate what they are claiming and to learn more.

In a study done by the Psychiatry Department of UCLA — and cited on TikTok by the creator known as AutisticScientist — researchers studied brain signal variability in autistic people.

This type of research focuses on brain activity patterns via the pattern of firing neurons.

The researchers of this study, using fMRI and other imaging technology, were tracking how brain variability changed over time for allistic vs. autistic brains.

What they found is that autistic brains age differently than allistic brains.

Typically there’s a lot of variability in allistic brains when they are children; however as the age into adulthood, the allistic brain becomes more emotionally stable due to less variability.

Conversely, their brains also become more inflexible due to their neurons firing in a more predictable manner.

In this case, more variability and randomness in the brain is a sign of a healthier brain.

Allistic brains stay in a less variable state for the rest of their lives while autistic brains have a very curious trajectory.

With autistic brains, we have a lot of variability as children (which is good though this also makes our brains more reactive) and we have more flexibility in our thinking.

Then, somewhere in adulthood, we experience less variability and become more inflexible due to our changed neuron firing pattern. Our brain activity patterns become more stable but they don’t stay this way..

As autistics become much older, a cool thing happens that makes us different from allistic people.

Later in adulthood our brains once again become more variable, flexible, and less stable in their neuron firing.

I think this could account for why I feel much less emotionally stable since hitting my 50s.

Now there could be arguments made that what I’m noticing is the effects of menopause with its decrease in the neuroprotective qualities of estrogen or that zI am experiencing the accumulative effect of years of repeated bouts of autistic burnout after masking for decades.

However, I have noticed I feel more flexible in my thinking and in a lot of ways, more creative and resourceful because I’m once again thinking more outside the box.

What I would love to see are similar studies on aging done on the brains of autistic people who did not grow up with the pressures of US capitalism compared with autistics who were more accommodated in their cultures.

I would like to see what effects this difference might have on their brains as adults. Would their brain signals variability change the same way that we do?

Perhaps because they’re not masking as much or at all, the results may be different.

What I’m saying is that perhaps more accommodated and supported autistic people would be more consistent in how their brains fire throughout their lives because they never tried to act neurotypical.

I want to know if this U-shaped pattern of brain firing is an across the board autistic pattern progression or if the change American autistics experience in adulthood is because of continued stress, trauma, and burnout due to a lack of support?

I would also like to see studies done on Autistic females versus autistic males as our biology and socialization have a different effect on our brain development.

More studies need to be done on autistic brain signals variability and autistic aging in general.

In addition, a study done where they factor in social economic demographics might also generate different results.

We desperately need more research on adult autistic brain functioning because much more of the research has been done on autistic children’s brains.

Right now, there’s a huge imbalance in the research.

This study and others that have been done in the last decade are patently demonstrating that autistic brains change in a very different way and so we need different accommodations and more support than we are getting.

Interestingly, in the comment section of this TikTok video, someone commented that as they have aged, they could tell that their brain regularly required them to adapt repeatedly when it came to how their brains learned new information as they aged.

Someone else said it was like their brain is an AI learning to adapt (at least in the way that AI currently behaves as of the writing of this article).

Whatever we discover about autistic brains and aging in the next 10 years, If I’m around, I’ll be excited to learn more.

If you would like to show your appreciation of my writing by buying me a coffee, you can do so at this link.