An illness of the soul is far more challenging than a physical illness because it is the root of all illnesses, every single one of them. If we attain the correct attitude toward the world, i.e., one of absolute love, care, and bestowal, which enters us into balance with the laws of nature, then we could be immersed in icy water for an hour and remain completely unharmed.

Achieving this state, however, is not a matter of practicing Eastern techniques. While such methods once helped people connect to nature and find a certain unity between their inner world and the environment, they no longer suit the person living in today’s modern world with its overblown egoism — the giant desire to enjoy at others’ expense. Those approaches were effective at a time when humanity functioned on a more primitive level, closely tied to nature’s inanimate, vegetative, and animate levels. But we have evolved at an extraordinary pace, breaking away from being able to calm ourselves into a state of balance at those levels.

Over time, we have become increasingly detached, rising above nature and constructing artificial systems of existence. This separation began thousands of years ago, but it accelerated significantly during the Middle Ages and especially in the last 300 to 400 years. The result has been a host of psychological, physical, and social problems.

On one hand, we attempt to compensate for this detachment through science and technology, trying to solve problems mechanically. But on the other hand, we can no longer live in harmony with nature like animals do. We have stepped outside of nature’s boundaries, and we are no longer a seamless part of it. Instead, we try to dominate, suppress, and control it, and such an approach leads to more and more suffering.

While, out of necessity, we need to continue treating physical illnesses that continually surface, we should couple this with learning how to enter into a state of mutual complementarity with nature — the healing of the soul. That is the ultimate key to entering into balance with nature and overcoming the inner illness that plagues humanity, which leads to every illness we perceive on the physical level.